sparklyr 1.6 blog post (#146)
rstudio/ai-blog: _posts/2021-03-25-sparklyr-1.6.0-released/sparklyr-1.6.0.Rmd

categories:
  - R
  - Packages/Releases
  - Distributed Computing
output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
preview: images/sparklyr-1.6.jpg
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = FALSE)
```

[`Sparklyr`](https://sparklyr.ai) 1.6 is now available on [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/sparklyr/index.html)!

To install `sparklyr` 1.6 from CRAN, run

```{r echo=TRUE, eval=FALSE}
install.packages("sparklyr")
```

In this blog post, we shall highlight the following features and enhancements
from `sparklyr` 1.6:

 * [Weighted quantile summaries](#weighted-quantile-summaries)
 * [Power iteration clustering](#power-iteration-clustering)
 * [`spark_write_rds()` + `collect_from_rds()`](#spark_write_rds-collect_from_rds)
 * [Dplyr-related improvements](#dplyr-related-improvements)

## Weighted quantile summaries

[Apache Spark](https://spark.apache.org) is well-known for supporting
approximate algorithms that trade off marginal amount of accuracy for greater
speed and parallelism.
Such algorithms are particularly beneficial for performing preliminary data
explorations at scale, as they enable users to quickly query certain estimated

> statistics within a predefined error margin while avoiding the high cost of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
statistics within a predefined error margin, while avoiding the high cost of
```

exact computations.

> One such algorithm is the Greenwald-Khanna online computation of quantile

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One example is the Greenwald-Khanna algorithm for on-line computation of quantile
```

summaries, as described in @10.1145/376284.375670.

> While this algorithm was originally designed for efficient $\epsilon$-

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This algorithm was originally designed for efficient $\epsilon$-
```

> approximation of quantiles within a large dataset without the notion of data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
approximation of quantiles within a large dataset *without* the notion of data
```

points carrying different weights, and the unweighted version of it has been
implemented as
[`approxQuantile()`](https://spark.apache.org/docs/2.0.0/api/java/org/apache/spark/sql/DataFrameStatFunctions.html#approxQuantile(java.lang.String,%20double[],%20double))

>  since Spark 2.0, the same algorithm can be generalized to handle weighted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 since Spark 2.0.
 However, the same algorithm can be generalized to handle weighted
```

inputs, and as `sparklyr` user [\@Zhuk66](https://github.com/Zhuk66) mentioned
in [this issue](https://github.com/sparklyr/sparklyr/issues/2915), a
[weighted version](https://github.com/sparklyr/sparklyr/blob/4b6bc6677ecf92787ab3521f364a8d80b973d92f/java/spark-1.5.2/weightedquantilesummaries.scala#L13-L332)

> of this algorithm can be a useful `sparklyr` feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of this algorithm makes for a useful `sparklyr` feature.
```

To properly explain what weighted-quantile means, we must clarify what the
weight of each data point signifies. For example, if we have a sequence of

> observations $(1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 2, -1, -1)$ and would like to find the median

Reviewer: ```suggestion
observations $(1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 2, -1, -1)$, and would like to find the median
```

> of all data points, then we can either run the unweighted version of

Reviewer: tried to simplify this sentence but don't have a good idea ;-) how about creating two bullet points instead, corresponding to the either-or?

`approxQuantile()` in Spark to scan through all 8 data points, or
alternatively, "compress" the data into 4 tuples of (value, weight):
$((1, 0.5), (0, 0.125), (2, 0.125), (-1, 0.25))$, where the second value of
each tuple represents how often a value occurs relative to the rest of the
observed values, and then find the median by scanning through the 4 tuples
using a weighted version of the Greenwald-Khanna algorithm.

We can also run through a contrived example involving the standard normal
distribution to illustrate the power of weighted quantile estimation in
`sparklyr` 1.6. Suppose we cannot simply run `qnorm()` in R to evaluate the
[quantile function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normal_distribution#Quantile_function)
of the standard normal distribution at $p = 0.25$ and $p = 0.75$, how can

> we get some vague idea about the 1st and 3rd quantile of this distribution?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we get some vague idea about the 1st and 3rd quantiles of this distribution?
```

One way is to sample a large number of data points from this distribution, and
then apply the Greenwald-Khanna algorithm to our unweighted samples, as shown
below:

```{r echo=TRUE, eval=FALSE}
library(sparklyr)

sc <- spark_connect(master = "local")

num_samples <- 1e6
samples <- data.frame(x = rnorm(num_samples))

samples_sdf <- copy_to(sc, samples, name = random_string())

samples_sdf %>%
  sdf_quantile(
    column = "x",
    probabilities = c(0.25, 0.75),
    relative.error = 0.01
  ) %>%
  print()
```

```
##        25%        75%
## -0.6629242  0.6874939
```

> Notice because we are working with an approximate algorithm and have specified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that because we are working with an approximate algorithm, and have specified
```

`relative.error = 0.01`, the estimated value of $-0.6629242$ from above
could be anywhere between the 24th and the 26th percentile of all samples.
In fact, it falls in the $25.36896$-th percentile:

```{r echo=TRUE, eval=FALSE}
pnorm(-0.6629242)
```

```
## [1] 0.2536896
```

Now how can we make use of weighted quantile estimation from `sparklyr` 1.6 to
obtain similar results? Simple! We can sample a large number of $x$ values

> uniformly randomly from $(-\infty, \infty)$ (or alternatively, just select a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uniformly from $(-\infty, \infty)$ (or alternatively, just select a
```

Reviewer: I think "randomly" is implied here

large number of values uniformly spaced between $(-M, M)$ where $M$ is
approximately $\infty$), and assign each $x$ value a weight of
$\displaystyle \frac{1}{\sqrt{2 \pi}}e^{-\frac{x^2}{2}}$, the standard normal

> distribution's probability density at $x$, and then make `sdf_quantile()` take

Reviewer: ```suggestion
distribution's probability density at $x$. Then, we make `sdf_quantile()` take
```

> both the value column `"x"` and the weight column into account, as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
both the value column, `"x"`, and the weight column into account, as shown below:
```

```{r echo=TRUE, eval=FALSE}
library(sparklyr)

sc <- spark_connect(master = "local")

num_samples <- 1e6
M <- 1000
samples <- tibble::tibble(
  x = M * seq(-num_samples / 2 + 1, num_samples / 2) / num_samples,
  weight = dnorm(x)
)

samples_sdf <- copy_to(sc, samples, name = random_string())

samples_sdf %>%
  sdf_quantile(
    column = "x",
    weight.column = "weight",
    probabilities = c(0.25, 0.75),
    relative.error = 0.01
  ) %>%
  print()
```
```
##    25%    75%
## -0.696  0.662
```

> Voilà! The estimates are not too far off from the 25th and 75th percentiles in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Voilà! The estimates are not too far off from the 25th and 75th percentiles (in
```

> relation to our abovementioned maximum permissible error of $0.01$:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
relation to our abovementioned maximum permissible error of $0.01$):
```

```{r echo=TRUE, eval=FALSE}
pnorm(-0.696)
```
```
## [1] 0.2432144
```
```{r echo=TRUE, eval=FALSE}
pnorm(0.662)
```
```
## [1] 0.7460144
```

## Power iteration clustering

Power iteration clustering (PIC), a simple and scalable graph clustering method

> presented in @PIC, first finds low-dimensional embedding of a dataset using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
presented in @PIC, first finds a low-dimensional embedding of a dataset, using
```

> truncated power iteration on normalized pairwise-similarity matrix of all data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
truncated power iteration on a normalized pairwise-similarity matrix of all data
```

> points, and then uses such embedding as the "cluster indicator", an intermediate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
points, and then uses this embedding as the "cluster indicator", an intermediate
```

representation of the dataset that leads to fast convergence when used as input

> to k-means clustering. This process has been very well illustrated by figure 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to k-means clustering. This process is very well illustrated in figure 1
```

of @PIC (reproduced below)

```{r, echo=FALSE, eval=TRUE}
knitr::include_graphics("images/PIC.png")
```

> in which the leftmost image is the visualization a dataset consisting of 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in which the leftmost image is the visualization of a dataset consisting of 3
```

circles, with points colored in red, green, and blue indicating clustering
results, and the subsequent images show the power iteration process gradually

> transforming the original set of points into what appears to be 3 disjoint line

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transforming the original set of points into what appears to be three disjoint line
```

segments, an intermediate representation that can be rapidly separated into 3
clusters using k-means clustering with $k = 3$.

In `sparklyr` 1.6, `ml_power_iteration()` was implemented to make the
[PIC functionality](http://spark.apache.org/docs/latest/api/java/org/apache/spark/ml/clustering/PowerIterationClustering.html)

> in Spark accessible from R. It expects a 3-column Spark dataframe that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in Spark accessible from R. It expects as input a 3-column Spark dataframe that
```

> represents a pairwise-similarity matrix of all data points as input. Two of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
represents a pairwise-similarity matrix of all data points. Two of
```

the columns in this dataframe should contain 0-based row and column indices, and

> the third column should contain the similarity measure between a pair of data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the third column should hold the corresponding similarity measure.
```

> points. In the example below, we will see a dataset consisting of 2 circles being

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below, we will see a dataset consisting of two circles being
```

> easily separated into 2 clusters by `ml_power_iteration()`, with the Gaussian

Reviewer: ```suggestion
easily separated into two clusters by `ml_power_iteration()`, with the Gaussian
```

          radius * c(x = cos(theta), y = sin(theta))
        })
  }
  # generate points on both circles
  pts <- rbind(
    gen_circle(radius = 1, num_pts = 80),
    gen_circle(radius = 4, num_pts = 80)
  )
  # populate the pairwise similarity matrix (stored as a 3-column dataframe)
  similarity_matrix <- data.frame()
  for (i in seq(2, nrow(pts)))
    similarity_matrix <- similarity_matrix %>%
      rbind(seq(i - 1L) %>%
        purrr::map_dfr(~ list(
          src = i - 1L, dst = .x - 1L,
          similarity = guassian_similarity(pts[i,], pts[.x,])
        ))
      )

  similarity_matrix
}

library(sparklyr)

sc <- spark_connect(master = "local")
sdf <- copy_to(sc, gen_similarity_matrix())
clusters <- ml_power_iteration(
  sdf, k = 2, max_iter = 10, init_mode = "degree",
  src_col = "src", dst_col = "dst", weight_col = "similarity"
)

clusters %>% print(n = 160)
```

```
## # A tibble: 160 x 2
##        id cluster
##     <dbl>   <int>
##   1     0       1
##   2     1       1
##   3     2       1
##   4     3       1
##   5     4       1
##   ...
##   157   156       0
##   158   157       0
##   159   158       0
##   160   159       0
```

> The output shows points from the 2 circles being assigned to separate clusters,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output shows points from the two circles being assigned to separate clusters,
```

as expected, after only a small number of PIC iterations.

## `spark_write_rds()` + `collect_from_rds()`

`spark_write_rds()` and `collect_from_rds()` are implemented as a less memory-

> intensive alternative to `collect()`. Unlike `collect()`, which retrieves all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consuming alternative to `collect()`. Unlike `collect()`, which retrieves all
```

elements of a Spark dataframe through the Spark driver node, hence potentially

> causing slowness or out-of-memory failures when collecting large amount of data,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
causing slowness or out-of-memory failures when collecting large amounts of data,
```

`spark_write_rds()`, when used in conjunction with `collect_from_rds()`, can
retrieve all partitions of a Spark dataframe directly from Spark workers,

> rather than through the Spark driver node. First `spark_write_rds()` will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rather than through the Spark driver node.
First, `spark_write_rds()` will
```

distribute the tasks of serializing Spark dataframe partitions in RDS version
2 format among Spark workers. Spark workers can then process multiple partitions
in parallel, each handling one partition at a time and persisting the RDS output
directly to disk, rather than sending dataframe partitions to the Spark driver
node. Finally, the RDS outputs can be re-assembled to R dataframes using
`collect_from_rds()`.

Shown below is an example of `spark_write_rds()` + `collect_from_rds()` usage,

> where RDS outputs are first saved to HDFS, and then downloaded to local

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where RDS outputs are first saved to HDFS, then downloaded to the local
```

> filesystem with `hadoop fs -get`, before being post-processed with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
filesystem with `hadoop fs -get`, and finally, post-processed with
```

`collect_from_rds()`:

```{r echo=TRUE, eval=FALSE}
library(sparklyr)
library(nycflights13)

num_partitions <- 10L
sc <- spark_connect(master = "yarn", spark_home = "/usr/lib/spark")
flights_sdf <- copy_to(sc, flights, repartition = num_partitions)

# Spark workers serialize all partition in RDS format in parallel and write RDS
# outputs to HDFS
spark_write_rds(
  flights_sdf,
  dest_uri = "hdfs://<namenode>:8020/flights-part-{partitionId}.rds"
)

# Run `hadoop fs -get` to download RDS files from HDFS to local file system
for (partition in seq(num_partitions) - 1)
  system2(
    "hadoop",
    c("fs", "-get", sprintf("hdfs://<namenode>:8020/flights-part-%d.rds", partition))
  )

# Post-process RDS outputs
partitions <- seq(num_partitions) - 1 %>%
  lapply(function(partition) collect_from_rds(sprintf("flights-part-%d.rds", partition)))

# Optionally, call `rbind()` to combine data from all partitions into a single R dataframe
flights_df <- do.call(rbind, partitions)
```

## Dplyr-related improvements

> Similar to other recent `sparklyr` releases, `sparklyr` 1.6 release comes with a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to other recent `sparklyr` releases, `sparklyr` 1.6 comes with a
```

> number of dplyr-related improvements, such as support for `where()` predicate

Reviewer: can you put these in a bullet list perhaps?

within `select()` and `summarize(across(...))` operations on Spark dataframes,
addition of `if_all()` and `if_any()` functions, and full compatibility with
`dbplyr` 2.0 backend API.

### `select(where(...))` and `summarize(across(where(...)))`

The dplyr `where(...)` construct is useful for applying selection or aggregation

> function to multiple columns that satisfy some boolean predicate. For example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functions to multiple columns that satisfy some boolean predicate. For example,
```

```{r echo=TRUE, eval=FALSE}
library(dplyr)

iris %>% select(where(is.numeric))
```
returns all numeric columns from the `iris` dataset, and

```{r echo=TRUE, eval=FALSE}
library(dplyr)

iris %>% summarize(across(where(is.numeric), mean))
```

computes the average of each numeric column.

In sparklyr 1.6, both types of operations can be applied to Spark dataframes, e.g.,

```{r echo=TRUE, eval=FALSE}
library(dplyr)
library(sparklyr)

sc <- spark_connect(master = "local")
iris_sdf <- copy_to(sc, iris, name = random_string())

iris_sdf %>% select(where(is.numeric))

iris %>% summarize(across(where(is.numeric), mean))
```

### `if_all()` and `if_any()`

> `if_all()` and `if_any()` are 2 convenience functions from `dplyr` 1.0.4 (see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`if_all()` and `if_any()` are two convenience functions from `dplyr` 1.0.4 (see
```

[here](https://www.tidyverse.org/blog/2021/02/dplyr-1-0-4-if-any) for more details)
that effectively ^[modulo possible implementation-dependent short-circuit evaluations]
combine the results of applying a boolean predicate to a tidy selection of columns
using the logical `and`/`or` operators.

Starting from sparklyr 1.6, `if_all()` and `if_any()` can also be applied to
Spark dataframes, .e.g.,

```{r echo=TRUE, eval=FALSE}
library(dplyr)
library(sparklyr)

sc <- spark_connect(master = "local")
iris_sdf <- copy_to(sc, iris, name = random_string())

# Select all records with Petal.Width > 2 and Petal.Length > 2
iris_sdf %>% filter(if_all(starts_with("Petal"), ~ .x > 2))

# Select all records with Petal.Width > 5 or Petal.Length > 5
iris_sdf %>% filter(if_any(starts_with("Petal"), ~ .x > 5))
```

### Compatibility with `dbplyr` 2.0 backend API

`Sparklyr` 1.6 is fully compatible with the newer `dbplyr` 2.0 backend API (by
implementing all interface changes recommended in

> [here](https://dbplyr.tidyverse.org/articles/backend-2.html)) while still

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[here](https://dbplyr.tidyverse.org/articles/backend-2.html)), while still
```

maintaining backward compatibility with the previous edition of `dbplyr` API, so
that `sparklyr` users will not be forced to switch to any particular version of
`dbplyr`.

> This should be a mostly non-user-visible change as of now, as in, the only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In fact, the only
```

discernible behavior change will be the following code

```{r echo=TRUE, eval=FALSE}
library(dbplyr)
library(sparklyr)

sc <- spark_connect(master = "local")

print(dbplyr_edition(sc))
```

outputting

```
[1] 2
```

if `sparklyr` is working with `dbplyr` 2.0+, and

```
[1] 1
```

if otherwise.

> ## Acknowledgement

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Acknowledgements
```

In chronological order, we would like to thank the following contributors for
making `sparklyr` 1.6 awesome:

* [\@yitao-li](https://github.com/yitao-li)
* [\@pgramme](https://github.com/pgramme)
* [\@javierluraschi](https://github.com/javierluraschi)
* [\@andrew-christianson](https://github.com/andrew-christianson)
* [\@jozefhajnala](https://github.com/jozefhajnala)
* [\@nathaneastwood](https://github.com/nathaneastwood)

We would also like to give a big shout-out to the wonderful open-source community

> behind `sparklyr`, without whom we would not have benefited from numerous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
behind `sparklyr`, without whom we would not have benefitted from numerous
```
